Documentation Update (#1112)
rrousselGit/river_pod: website/docs/concepts/provider_lifecycles.mdx

---
title: Provider Lifecycles
---

## When does my Provider get created and disposed?

The states that all different types of providers can go through are the same:

- Uninitialized
- Creating
- Alive
- Disposing

### Uninitialized

An uninitialized provider does not take up any memory since its state is not initialized.

> It will stay that way until an Alive provider or the UI reads or watches it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It will stay that way until another provider or the UI wants to obtain that provider's state.
```

> It will stay that way until an Alive provider or the UI reads or watches it.

Reviewer: > It will stay that way until [...]

What is that supposed to mean? Providers never go back to initialized state, besides maybe autoDispose

### Creating -> Alive

> When an uninitialized provider is being read or watched it will be created.

Reviewer: The provider isn't created. Its state is

I don't think it's necessary to mention "read or watched". It sounds redundant and ignores ref.listen

When a provider is created your provider creation function will be run. Any
providers that you read or watch will be created as needed and their state will be retrieved.

If there are any circular dependencies during this creation process Riverpod will throw an error.

> The best way to fix this error is to redesign your dependencies to have a uni-directional dataflow.

Reviewer: I don't think that's the correct place to discuss about this. Maybe within the "combining providers" part.

Uni-directional dataflow is not related to life-cycles

The provider's state is stored in a [ProviderContainer]. In a Flutter app this container is in a [ProviderScope] widget.

:::warning
Do not create a ProviderContainer for use in flutter unless using [UncontrolledProviderScope] and you know what you are doing.
:::

### Alive

When your provider is Alive, changes to its state will cause dependent providers and/or the dependent UI to rebuild.

### Alive -> Disposing

Providers are not necessarily automatically disposed, and this is where many developers run into issues and questions.

There are two ways for a provider to be disposed.

> - When defined using the .autoDispose modifier and no longer being watched by the UI or another provider

Reviewer: > .autoDispose

needs link

- When the provider is being recreated due to a change in another provider that was watched within the current provider's create function
  Learn more about this second case by reading [Combining Providers](/docs/concepts/combining_providers)

> In both cases you can register actions that will happen before the provider is disposed using `ref.onDispose`.

Reviewer: > `ref.onDispose`

Should be redirect to the appropriate doc

> A disposed provider is in the uninitialized state again, and will be created on demand when the provider is watched or read again.

Reviewer: That's only true for autoDispose.

When a provider rebuilds due to ref.watch, it's not passing by the uninitialized state. That's the difference between a FutureProvider going back to  AsyncLoading vs exposing an AsyncData(..., isRefreshing: true)
